
+++
title = "kiss is not easy"
date = 2022-09-18
draft = true

[taxonomies]
categories = ["programming"]
tags = ["culture"]

[extra]
lang = "en"
toc = true
show_comment = true
math = false
mermaid = false
+++
---

# KISS 

The other day I was having a conversation with my good friend Alba about some of the common pitfalls that bad engineers fall for:

- "Cuñadismo"[^1]
- Overengineering
- Bikeshedding, cargo culting, oldsplanning, fallacies, micromanagement, emotional micromanagement[^2]
- Mindless pattern application 
- Object oriented design and polymorphism
- Functional programming purist 
- Abuse of frameworks and higher level tools
- Lack of understanding, awareness and interest of low level details...
- Copy and paste culture[^3]

This post has the objective to comment on one of the most famous and missinterpreted mottos of software culture. 

**KISS**: Keep it simple, stupid!

just say no - russ cox
https://benghancock.github.io/blog/2022/tao-of-acme.html

```
> 01. Toggle on/off line wrapping
> 02. Toggle on/off EOL character display

Write shorter lines.

> 03. Display line numbers

You can go to a specific line with :n and 
find out the current line with Edit =

> 04. Display ruler

(...). Just say no.

> 05. Rectangluar block selection

(...).  But again, just say no.

> 07. Automatic insertion of spaces for tabs

Just say no. (...)

> 08. Syntax highlighting of code

Just say no.

> 09. Code folding

(...)

You're better off writing code that doesn't need folding
to be read.

> 10. Code clips/completion

Just say no.

> 11. Bookmarks

Make a file with things like

	/sys/src/cmd/acme/scrl.c
	/sys/src/cmd/acme/scrl.c:100
	/sys/src/cmd/acme/scrl.c:/^mousethread

and open it.

> 13. Customize the contextual display of commands in the tag line

Just say no.

> 14. Customize the color scheme

Just say no.
```

https://marc.info/?l=9fans&m=121916884525962&w=2

There is this story of Joe Armstrong or Chuck Moore (I don't remember and my memory is bad) writting the same code multiple times starting from scratch. Creating a `folder_1` `folder_2` ... `folder_n` for each solution until the solution was simple enough.

https://groups.google.com/g/erlang-programming/c/OiyGQ4UHqxw/m/HgGma01CGqYJ

A funny quote:

Most time isn't spent programming anyway -  programmer time is spent:

a) fixing broken stuff that should not be broken
b) trying to figure out what problem the customer actually wants solving
c) writing experimental code to test some idea
d) googling for some obscure fact that is needed to solve a) or b)
e) writing and testing production code

And I want to focus in a). Fixing stuff that should not be broker. Or writting code that should never be written. Most code we have to write should not exist in the first place. We are dealing with decades of technical debt and bad engineering. Fixing this is a topic I'd let to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kZRE7HIO3vk and his buddy Jonathan Blow. Let's try to focus in what we can easily control. Our code.

A good example of this unix philosophy of not writting unecessary code is found the unix kernel. The http://files.catwell.info/misc/mirror/the-unix-programming-environment-kernighan-pike.pdf by Kernighan and Pike has one of my favourites examples.

We even have modern memes about this: https://github.com/kelseyhightower/nocode The message may not be obvious. What seems to be a satire has a really deep and explored philosophical connotation in engineering. The art of simplicity. The art of not doing unecesary work. The art of solving the problem. The art of not create new problems to solve a problem.


Going back to the forth philosophy and engineering minimalism.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SxdOUGdseq4